Dear friends, there are many
questions that arise when we have
a sensitive way of thinking, what people
call overthinking, which causes us a lot of
suffering. That is, we tend to overthink and misinterpret, causing
us to become detached from reality and
suffer greatly. This is what we call a sensitive soul.
Here's a question about
this from Ms. Mai: "Hello, Ms. Mai. I hope
you can help me with my psychological issues. My sensitivity is
too great, causing me a lot of distress.
Just a small action, a small gesture, or a
normal word spoken to someone else,
and I overthink it to all sorts of things. I
don't know how to change this habit.
I hope you can help and guide me.
Thank you, Ms. Mai." This
tendency to overthink causes
a lot of suffering.
For example, if my
boyfriend missed our date today, I
think, "Maybe he's meeting someone else today," or "He's
tired of me today," or "
This is how it is today," or "That is how it is today." All sorts of
interpretations arise, preventing me from returning to reality and
improving my state of mind. I'm constantly
worried.  Or maybe he has
something to do today, I think. Then I call to see what it is,
to live with reality, but then I
stand there, and my heart gets
angry. A little later, I ask him, and if
he says there's traffic, then my
mind starts to overthink, "He must be lying to
me. He must be with some other woman.
What kind of traffic could there be?" I pull out my phone and
ask if that road is congested today.
People who overthink suffer a lot. It's the same
with a husband, it's the same with anyone.
Overthinking makes
you lose trust in those
around you. That means you don't trust anyone.
Your mind keeps thinking things up, making you
distrust people. That's a very painful thing,
not normal. It's
called an overly sensitive soul, a soul that's
too sensitive, or a mind that
overthinks too much, detached from reality, causing
you suffering. The way to solve
that is to practice self-cultivation. For example, you have to
practice like this: "This is the
cup lid, this is the cup,
this is the plate."
Then, if anyone asks me, I ask them.  When someone asks, "
Where are you going?", they reply, "I'm going to the
market." So you have to believe them immediately. They say, "I'm
going to the market." Then you deduce it from your own
mind, your own karma. It's definitely a lie. You
say, "
No, I heard you go to the market!" Your ears
heard you go to the market! It has to be that clear. Just keep
practicing like that, keep practicing like
that, and gradually you'll get used to it. "My ears
hear, my eyes see," you say.
Where does this karma come from? This karma
is like exaggerating small things, making up
small things, making up small things about others. This karma
will
create a mind that
overanalyzes, a sensitive mind, a sensitive soul, causing
you to suffer karmic consequences.
These people suffer a lot. Yen has many
questions that you're stuck on and don't know how to answer.
Just do this for me: "This is a
real rose, this is a rose." Practice like
that for a while. "
I
heard people say this, that's why
there's a saying in Buddhist scriptures like this."
I heard that at that time, the Buddha was in the
garden of Anathapindika in the city of Sapati.
So, it has to be the truth, what I
heard and where it happened. That is,
we should say what the truth is, and in
this life, we must practice speaking truthfully. If you see something, say you saw it; if you hear something, say you didn't see it. If you hear something, say you heard it; if you don't hear it,
say you didn't hear it.
But when people are talking to each other and
someone says, "It seems like this person is having an affair,"
you know, "Oh, this is karmic speculation, the
consequences are very painful. I don't
participate in such things."
You have to practice like this to change
your karma; there's no other way.
So you have to study Buddhist teachings a lot,
know cause and effect, so that you can
handle situations, know
how to resolve problems, and transform your karmic
force. Don't participate in
gossip, don't sit around discussing
things that are completely irrelevant. Now on
Facebook, there are so many gossips about people you
don't know clearly, but you all
rush in to
comment. You don't know what people are like, you
judge them in a way that's called 'I
didn't see it,' you say you do. If you don't know, you say you do. That means
you have to see and know clearly and
truthfully.  As mentioned above, studying
Buddhist teachings is very beneficial. The five precepts for lay
Buddhists include the precept
against lying and speaking
truthfully. The repentance sutra also mentions
repenting for sins committed because one doesn't know how to speak, doesn't know how to hear, doesn't know how to hear, and doesn't know how to
see. Therefore, one suffers greatly
as a result of a sensitive mind and a tendency to overthink and misinterpret,
always living detached from reality,
unable to assess situations accurately.
Those in
business or politics with
such a sensitive mind will
fail because they cannot accurately assess
situations and
will lose trust in others.
They will become isolated because they don't trust anyone, and if they don't
trust anyone, others
won't trust them either. They won't be able to
share with others. Therefore, this is the
painful consequence
for those who don't understand
and commit negative speech karma. So
we must correct this immediately.  Our nature is such
that if we have the intention but
don't see or speak, if we see but don't know or
speak, if we hear but accidentally speak to
a true practitioner, then we will suffer
very heavy consequences, possibly lasting
until the end of our lives. One possibility is
madness, the other is mental confusion and ignorance;
that consequence is immense suffering.
[Music]